[Outlook] (sample) Smart Alerts using soft block and hard block on-send options (#310)
OfficeDev/PnP-OfficeAddins: Samples/outlook-check-item-categories/README.md

## Features

![Sample displaying Outlook Smart Alerts when required categories are missing from the message or appointment, and the task pane used to apply the categories to the item. Four features are highlighted.](./assets/outlook-check-item-categories-features.png)

1. Use event-based activation triggered by the `OnNewMessageCompose` and `OnNewAppointmentOrganizer` events to create color categories based on specific keywords.

1. Use event-based activation triggered by the `OnMessageSend` and `OnAppointmentSend` events to verify that a required category is applied to a new message or appointment for each detected keyword in the item's subject or body.

1. Use Outlook Smart Alerts to block a message or appointment from being sent if it's missing some or all of the required categories.

1. Apply the required categories to the message or appointment using the add-in's task pane.

## Applies to

- Outlook on Windows (minimum build - 16.0.14511.10000)

## Prerequisites

> - A Microsoft 365 subscription. If you don't have a Microsoft 365 subscription, you can get a [free developer sandbox](https://developer.microsoft.com/microsoft-365/dev-program#Subscription) that provides a renewable 90-day Microsoft 365 E5 subscription for development purposes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A Microsoft 365 subscription. If you don't have a Microsoft 365 subscription, you can get a [free developer sandbox](https://aka.ms/m365/devprogram#Subscription) that provides a renewable 90-day Microsoft 365 E5 subscription for development purposes.
```

- Outlook on Windows with a minimum build of 16.0.14511.10000. For guidance with client configuration, see [How to preview](https://docs.microsoft.com/office/dev/add-ins/outlook/autolaunch#how-to-preview).

## Solution

| Solution | Author(s) |
| -------- | --------- |
| Use Outlook Smart Alerts to verify that required color categories are applied to a new message or appointment before it's sent | Microsoft |

## Version history

| Version | Date | Comments |
| ------- | ----- | -------- |
| 1.0 | 05-05-2022 | Initial release |

## Run the sample

Run this sample in Outlook on Windows. The add-in web files are served from this repository on GitHub.

1. Download the **manifest.xml** file from this sample to a folder on your computer.

1. Sideload the add-in manifest in Outlook on Windows by following the manual instructions in [Sideload Outlook add-ins for testing](https://docs.microsoft.com/office/dev/add-ins/outlook/sideload-outlook-add-ins-for-testing).

### Try it out

Once the add-in is loaded, use the following steps to try out its functionality.

1. Create a new message or appointment.

>     Office Add-ins Sample color categories are created. To verify this from the new message or appointment window, select **File** \> **Info** \> **Properties** \> **Categories**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Color categories named **Office Add-ins Sample...** are created. To verify this from the new message or appointment window, select **File** \> **Info** \> **Properties** \> **Categories**.
```

>     > Office Add-ins Sample color categories are created. To verify this from the new message or appointment window, select **File** \> **Info** \> **Properties** \> **Categories**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Office Add-ins Sample color categories are created. To verify this from the new message or appointment window, select **File** \> **Info** \> **Properties** \> **Categories**.
```
This right carat character doesn't render correctly in the list. Suggest removing it and manually adding 4 spaces to the second line of the procedure for readability.

Author: Thanks, @lindalu-MSFT. Just making sure I'm seeing the same thing you're getting. This is how it appears on my end. Do you still suggest removing the right carat character?

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/15154970/167505819-61fa2f38-555b-45e1-96a5-1865f34d456e.png)

1. Add a recipient.

1. Add text to the subject and body of the message or appointment, with one or both fields containing one or more of the following keywords.

   - expense reports

   - legal

   - marketing

   - performance reviews

   - sales

   For example, "The Sales team's performance reviews will be submitted tomorrow."

1. Send the message or appointment.

>     > An alert appears that reads, "You must assign the following categories before your message can be sent: Office Add-ins Sample: sales, Office Add-ins Sample: performance reviews".

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    An alert appears that reads, "You must assign the following categories before your message can be sent: Office Add-ins Sample: sales, Office Add-ins Sample: performance reviews".
```

1. Select **Don't Send**.

> 1. To apply the required color categories to the message or appointment, select the **Select categories** button from the ribbon of the message or appointment window.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. To apply the required color categories to the message or appointment, choose **Select categories** from the ribbon of the message or appointment window.
```

>     The Office Add-ins Smart Alerts Sample task pane appears.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    The **Office Add-ins Smart Alerts Sample** task pane appears.
```

>     > The Office Add-ins Smart Alerts Sample task pane appears.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    The Office Add-ins Smart Alerts Sample task pane appears.
```

1. Select the applicable categories from the category list. To apply multiple categories, select and hold **Ctrl** while selecting the categories.

1. Select **Apply Selected Categories**.

>     > The applied categories appear in the **Categories applied** section of the task pane.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    The applied categories appear in the **Categories applied** section of the task pane.
```

```xml
<LaunchEvents>
    <LaunchEvent Type="OnNewMessageCompose" FunctionName="onItemComposeHandler"/>
    <LaunchEvent Type="OnNewAppointmentOrganizer" FunctionName="onItemComposeHandler"/>
    <LaunchEvent Type="OnMessageSend" FunctionName="onItemSendHandler" SendMode="SoftBlock"/>
    <LaunchEvent Type="OnAppointmentSend" FunctionName="onItemSendHandler" SendMode="Block"/>
</LaunchEvents>
```

The `OnMessageSend` event uses the `SoftBlock` option to prevent a user from sending a message if some or all of the required categories are missing. In the event that the add-in becomes unavailable (for example, if the add-in encounters a loading error) and can't check the message for applied categories, the user will still be able to send the message.

The `OnAppointmentSend` event uses the `Block` option to prevent a user from sending a meeting invite if some or all of the required categories are missing. If the add-in encounters a loading error and can't check the invite for applied categories, the user will not be able to send the invite until the add-in becomes available again.

> For additional information on `SendMode` options, see [Available SendMode options](https://docs.microsoft.com//javascript/api/manifest/launchevent?view=common-js-preview#available-sendmode-options-preview).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For additional information on `SendMode` options, see [Available SendMode options](https://docs.microsoft.com/javascript/api/manifest/launchevent?view=common-js-preview#available-sendmode-options-preview).
```

The `associate` method is called in `commands.js` to map the function IDs specified in the manifest to the appropriate event handler.

```javascript
Office.actions.associate("onItemComposeHandler", onItemComposeHandler);
Office.actions.associate("onItemSendHandler", onItemSendHandler);
```

Once the handler processes the event, it calls the `event.completed` method. This method uses the `allowEvent` property to indicate whether the handled event can continue to execute or must terminate. When the event must terminate because it doesn't meet the add-in's conditions, the `errorMessage` property is used to display an alert to the user.

```javascript
let message = `You must assign the following categories before your ${Office.context.mailbox.item.itemType} can be sent: ${requiredCategories.join(", ")}`;
console.log(message);
sendEvent.completed({ allowEvent: false, errorMessage: message });
return;
```

![Screenshot of the Outlook Smart Alerts error message when required categories are missing from the message or appointment being sent.](./assets/outlook-check-item-categories-smart-alerts.png)

> Event-based add-ins should be short-running and lightweight. To prevent the possibility of a long-running operation that may lead to an add-in timeout, the color category creation process is handled by `onItemComposeHandler` instead of `onItemSendHandler`.

Reviewer: Is this timeout thing specific to the send event? This text says "Event-based add-ins should be short-running" which makes it sound like moving a long operation into the compose event handler isn't really going to change much.

Author: Good question. There is a timeout for event-based add-ins in general, but there is also a separate processing duration for the send events.

> Event-based add-ins are expected to be short-running and lightweight. To prevent the possibility of a long-running operation that may lead to an add-in timeout, the color category creation process is handled by `onItemComposeHandler` instead of `onItemSendHandler`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Event-based add-ins should be short-running and lightweight. To prevent the possibility of a long-running operation that may lead to an add-in timeout, the color category creation process is handled by `onItemComposeHandler` instead of `onItemSendHandler`.
```
Passive tense, plus who/what expects the event-based add-in to be short?

### Implement a task pane

> Task panes can be used to complement event-based activation by providing users with a venue to further interact with the add-in. The `taskpane.html` and `taskpane.js` files configure the UI and functionality of the task pane, respectively. This allows the user to easily choose and apply the required Office Add-ins Sample color categories to the message or appointment.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Task panes are used to complement event-based activation by providing users with a venue to further interact with the add-in. The `taskpane.html` and `taskpane.js` files configure the UI and functionality of the task pane, respectively. This allows the user to easily choose and apply the required Office Add-ins Sample color categories to the message or appointment.
```

> ## Known Issues

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Known issues
```

---
title: "Use Outlook Smart Alerts"
page_type: sample
urlFragment: outlook-add-in-check-item-categories
products:
- office-add-ins
- office-outlook
- office
languages:
- javascript
extensions:
  contentType: samples
  technologies:
  - Add-ins
  createdDate: 05/05/2022 10:00:00 AM
description: "Use Outlook Smart Alerts to verify that required color categories are applied to a new message or appointment before it's sent."
---

# Use Outlook Smart Alerts

**Applies to**: Outlook on Windows

## Summary

This sample uses Outlook Smart Alerts to verify that required color categories are applied to a new message or appointment before it's sent. Specific keywords detected in the subject or body of the item determine the required categories. If no categories or only some of the required categories are applied to the message or appointment, the add-in blocks the item from being sent and alerts the user to apply the missing categories. The user can apply categories to the item from the add-in task pane.

> Smart Alerts and its related events, `OnMessageSend` and `OnAppointmentSend`, are currently available in preview. For documentation related to this sample, see [Use Smart Alerts and the onMessageSend event in your Outlook add-in (preview)](https://docs.microsoft.com/office/dev/add-ins/outlook/smart-alerts-onmessagesend-walkthrough).

Reviewer 3: Consider adding a link to the categories article too.

Author: Thanks. Added the link.

> Smart Alerts and its related events, `OnMessageSend` and `OnAppointmentSend`, are currently available in preview. For documentation related to this sample, see [Use Smart Alerts and the onMessageSend event in your Outlook add-in (preview)](https://docs.microsoft.com/office/dev/add-ins/outlook/smart-alerts-onmessagesend-walkthrough) and [Configure your Outlook add-in for event-based activation](https://docs.microsoft.com/office/dev/add-ins/outlook/autolaunch).

Reviewer 3: Consider also adding the categories article: https://docs.microsoft.com/office/dev/add-ins/outlook/categories

Author: Thanks for reposting this suggestion. I misread 'categories' in your previous post. Link to article has been added.

```xml
<Runtime resid="WebViewRuntime.Url">
    <Override type="javascript" resid="JSRuntime.Url"/>
</Runtime>
...
<bt:Url id="WebViewRuntime.Url" DefaultValue="https://officedev.github.io/Office-Add-in-samples/Samples/outlook-check-item-categories/src/commands.html" />
<bt:Url id="JSRuntime.Url" DefaultValue="https://officedev.github.io/Office-Add-in-samples/Samples/outlook-check-item-categories/src/commands/commands.js" />
```

The `<LaunchEvents>` element maps the four events that activate the add-in to the functions that handle each event. To determine how the add-in will handle the `OnMessageSend` and `OnAppointmentSend` events, an additional `SendMode` attribute is specified.

```xml
<LaunchEvents>
    <LaunchEvent Type="OnNewMessageCompose" FunctionName="onItemComposeHandler"/>
    <LaunchEvent Type="OnNewAppointmentOrganizer" FunctionName="onItemComposeHandler"/>
    <LaunchEvent Type="OnMessageSend" FunctionName="onItemSendHandler" SendMode="SoftBlock"/>
    <LaunchEvent Type="OnAppointmentSend" FunctionName="onItemSendHandler" SendMode="Block"/>
</LaunchEvents>
```

> The `OnMessageSend` event uses the `SoftBlock` option to prevent a user from sending a message if some or all of the required categories are missing. In the event that the add-in becomes unavailable (for example, if the add-in encounters a loading error) and can't check the message for applied categories, the user will still be able to send the message.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `OnMessageSend` event uses the `SoftBlock` option to prevent a user from sending a message if any of the required categories are missing. In the event that the add-in becomes unavailable (for example, if the add-in encounters a loading error) and can't check the message for applied categories, the user will still be able to send the message.
```

> The `OnAppointmentSend` event uses the `Block` option to prevent a user from sending a meeting invite if some or all of the required categories are missing. If the add-in encounters a loading error and can't check the invite for applied categories, the user will not be able to send the invite until the add-in becomes available again.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `OnAppointmentSend` event uses the `Block` option to prevent a user from sending a meeting invite if any of the required categories are missing. If the add-in encounters a loading error and can't check the invite for applied categories, the user will not be able to send the invite until the add-in becomes available again.
```

> For additional information on `SendMode` options, see [Available SendMode options](https://docs.microsoft.com/javascript/api/manifest/launchevent?view=common-js-preview#available-sendmode-options-preview).

Reviewer 3: Consider using an outlook view
```suggestion
For additional information on `SendMode` options, see [Available SendMode options](https://docs.microsoft.com/javascript/api/manifest/launchevent?view=outlook-js-preview#available-sendmode-options-preview).
```

Office.actions.associate("onItemSendHandler", onItemSendHandler);
```

Once the handler processes the event, it calls the `event.completed` method. This method uses the `allowEvent` property to indicate whether the handled event can continue to execute or must terminate. When the event must terminate because it doesn't meet the add-in's conditions, the `errorMessage` property is used to display an alert to the user.

```javascript
let message = `You must assign the following categories before your ${Office.context.mailbox.item.itemType} can be sent: ${requiredCategories.join(", ")}`;
console.log(message);
sendEvent.completed({ allowEvent: false, errorMessage: message });
return;
```

![Screenshot of the Outlook Smart Alerts error message when required categories are missing from the message or appointment being sent.](./assets/outlook-check-item-categories-smart-alerts.png)

Event-based add-ins should be short-running and lightweight. To prevent the possibility of a long-running operation that may lead to an add-in timeout, the color category creation process is handled by `onItemComposeHandler` instead of `onItemSendHandler`.

### Implement a task pane

> Task panes are used to complement event-based activation by providing users with a venue to further interact with the add-in. The `taskpane.html` and `taskpane.js` files configure the UI and functionality of the task pane, respectively. This allows the user to easily choose and apply the required Office Add-ins Sample color categories to the message or appointment.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A task pane is being used to complement event-based activation by providing users with a venue to further interact with the add-in. The `taskpane.html` and `taskpane.js` files configure the UI and functionality of the task pane, respectively. This allows the user to easily choose and apply the required Office Add-ins Sample color categories to the message or appointment.
```
